---
layout: post
author: nslavov
title: Thoughts
date:   2014-01-01
description: Thoughts
---



<p class="intro"><span class="dropcap">B</span>elow is a collection of thoughts from the period 2011 - 2014</p>


- One may look at everything beyond one's control and see it as an insurmountable mountain on the way to one's dreams. When I look at everything beyond my control, I see a reason to work even harder on the things I can influence.

- The more genuine our actions and words are, the less often we have to emphasize it.

- If you can synergize, do not compromise!

- Emotions without reason are reckless; reason without emotions is devoid of passion and significance. The synergistic confluence between reason and emotion is the ultimate culmination of human potentiality.

- The pursuit of understanding and appreciation reveals a sweeping panorama of unparalleled grandeur.

- One cannot have more than what one has appreciation for.
- If you have a profound understanding of something, remember that there is a deeper level of understanding even if nobody had ever reached it.
- Look behind the ostensible; the world is too interrelated and complicated to leave independent variables.
- Often, the values we place on our accomplishments are commensurate with the efforts we employ to achieve them.
- I might suffer, I might lose, but if I survive I will do everything within my power to recover, prevail and ultimately thrive.
- The love toward the ostensible appearance is as ephemeral and superficial as the appearance itself.
- People usually communicate more than they realize. If you want to know someone, pay attention to one's projections.
- Acknowledging ignorance is a prerequisite for learning.
- Guilt is usually inversely proportional to the length and complexity of an excuse.
- Do not teach by saying but by doing. Expectations mold behavior.
- Only strong people can admit their weaknesses.
- Insecurity is frequently manifested by pretended righteousness.
- All personal perceptions start as subjective impressions in subjective worlds; only deliberate efforts and rational analysis may shed objective light on these subjectively distorted worlds.
- If you mean really when you say really, what do you mean when you do not say really?
- If you think that you do not have biases, you either do not have biases or you have but you are not aware of them; the latter is much more common than the former.
- Every moment of consciousness is a precious eternity that I cherish and marvel.
- It is difficult to be strong enough to be the weakest player.
- In the long run, conceding a mistake is more likely to strengthen, rather than to weaken your position.
- Before proposing a hypothesis, try to envision the arguments of your harshest critics.
- Working on a particular problem without realizing its general significance is analogous to mining diamonds without seeing them in daylight.
- Often the most propitious trail to a mountaintop is visible only from altitudes above the mountaintop.
- The insistence on perfection often leads to stagnation.
- Settling for mediocrity in order to avoid effort is an ignominious course that inevitably leads to apathy and frustrations.
- Do not follow the easiest road, but the easiest road in the right direction.
- Cruelty and self-identification with exclusive groups are common disguises of insecurity; gentleness and magnanimity require strength and inner-confidence.
- Often one cannot see the far-reaching consequences of what happens when it happens.
- Money can buy many things, but not the best things.
- Be a winner who knows how to lose.
- Ungrounded, unrealistic optimism is the royal road to pessimism; nothing dampens down hope as a long series of unfulfilled expectations.
- The mere existence of a technology does not warrant its use.
- Many of our current problems are unintended consequences of solutions to former problems.
- Our moods shape the prism through which we perceive the world.
- Do not be happy in spite of your problems; be happy because of the potential for growth and the challenges that your problems present.
- Do not keep happiness for the moment when you have solved your problems; even if this moment comes, you will be listless and bored.
- Often times truth evades me not because it is too complicated or requires much intelligence and insight, but because of my reluctance to see what I do not want to see.
- Even when pain is unavoidable, suffering is a matter of choice.
- Only problems and vicissitudes that appear to exceed our capacity to overcome them (if only on a perceptual level) cause depression and desperation.
- I know of nothing more powerful and resilient and yet fragile than beauty and love. Only life comes close, but then life is love and beauty itself!
- What we can do at any moment in time is fundamentally limited by our paradigmatic understanding at this time. By working hard, we can asymptotically approach this limit but making quantum leaps requires changing the underlying paradigms, deepening our ontological understanding. It is amazing how far we can go by understanding, deeply understanding simple principles.
- The implications and the relevance of the third law of Newton are profound even beyond the realm of physics.
- The mere existence does not appeal to me. If I cannot live, I would rather die but not before I have exhausted all options for enjoying and celebrating life.
- There is a phase transition between 1 and 2!

# Favorite Quotes

- You make a living by what you get, but life by what you give.
- What we desire most eagerly, we believe most easily.
- Humility is the mother and courage the father of virtue.
- This is the true joy in life, the being used for a purpose recognized by yourself as a mighty one; the being a force of nature instead of a feverish selfish little clod of ailments and grievances, complaining that the world will not devote itself to making you happy. (George Bernard Shaw)
- The dated linoleum in his kitchen bespoke a man [David Packard] who needed no material symbols to proclaim I am a millionaire. (Jim Colins)
